# Meta SAM 3D Interactive Viewer

This Project has been made specifically for rendering 3D models generated by Meta's SAM 3D AI model. As part of a separate project, an API was made to
interact with Meta's SAM 3D to mask images and create custom 3D models quickly for later integration into a Unity project for a WPI MQP.
This interactive viewer can take in Gaussian Splats (in the .ply format) and display them with a re-lighting technique outlined by Andrew Chan here : https://andrewkchan.dev/posts/lit-splat.html
This relighting technique uses a bilateral filter to smooth out the surface of the re-lit surface, in addition to sharpening edges based two sigmoid values. The full equation for the Bilateral filter can be found in the article provided by the link.

The mentioned 2D Image-To-3D model API can return these Gaussian Splats AND GLB meshes, so this viewer was made to toggle between the mesh view and the splat view. The user can move around the scene to observe different parts of their models
with more clarity, in addition to rotating the models around and tweaking the properties of the lighting frameworks in real-time. This project meets the requirements of
the WPI Computer Graphics Course Final Project in the following ways:

### 1. At least two 3D models that are more complex than a simple geometric shape.
Rendering both the Gaussian Splat and the Mesh object from the SAM 3D API satisfies this requirement, in addition to the generation of hats (see below).

### 2. At least two model transformations that cause some part of the scene to animate in an obvious way.
The mesh and splat models can be transformed around the scene using the mouse and the keyboard. The user can drag on the model to rotate it in place, and holding shift will rotate the model around the Z-axis for an extra degree of freedom.
Additionally, the models can be translated around the scene using the arrow keys on the keyboard.

### 3. At least one point light that illuminates the scene using Phong shading. / 4. At least one spotlight with clearly visible boundaries.
There is a spotlight that illuminates the scene using Phong shading within the mesh model view mode. The boundary of this spotlight can be edited in size using the HTML input slider.
This spotlight satisfies the requirements for point light and spotlight.

### 5. At least one textured object that also has a default texture.
The imported mesh and ply object both use vertex colors due to the way that Facebook research setup the SAM 3D model generation. The colors come from the Gaussian Splat data and are reconstructed for the mesh.
The SAM 3D source code actually had to be edited on our end to get the colors to generate with more saturation as there is currently a bug flushing them out compared to the splat.
Additionally, if the vertex colors are not found, a default texture will be applied, and the hat model used also employs a custom texture.

### 6. At least one camera animation.
The camera can be controlled by the user using the WASD keys for side to side movement, and the E/Q keys for up-down movement. This movement is detached from the model itself.

### 7. At least one hierarchical model with at least two levels (parent, child, and grandchild).
The user has the option to spawn in hats that generate on top of the custom object mesh. These hats only spawn in the mesh viewer, and light is applied accordingly. An infinite amount of hats can be stacked on top of each other,
so be careful of placing too many, but they are not found to be that graphics intensive compared to the splat model. These hats will rotate and translate relative to the parent model.

### 8. At least one clearly visible projection shadow cast by the point light. You can also opt to use a shadow buffer.
There is a projection shadow that will occur on the floor surface in the scene when the spotlight is on. The shadows can be toggled with the "K" key, and will also turn off automatically if the diffuse lighting or
spotlight has been turned off.

### 9. At least one clearly visible reflection. / 10. At least one clearly visible refraction.
Glass mode (toggled using the key "G" in the mesh viewer) satisfies both the reflection and refraction component of this rubric. The glass mode uses reflections from the scene in addition to a .65 refraction to simulate
a glass look on any mesh object that is uploaded. This mode does not apply to the hats in the scene.

### 11. A textured skybox.
There is a textured skybox in the mesh viewer mode. If the texture cannot be found then the default texture will be applied.

### 12. Keyboard controls for the following: / 13. Toggle the animation on and off or, alternatively, control the motion of one or more objects in the scene with the keyboard.
The objects in the scene can be transformed around the scene by clicking and dragging the mouse on the screen to rotate the object, or using the arrow keys to
move the object side-to-side in the canvas.

### 14. Toggle the shadows on and off.
The shadows in the scene can be toggled on and off manually using the "K" key in the mesh viewer.

### 15. Toggle the diffuse and specular components of the point light on and off (keeping ambient). When the point light is off, the shadows should disappear.
The diffuse components of the light model can be toggled using the "1" key, and the specular components using the "2" key.
Additionally, the light can be entirely turned off using the "L" key.

### 16. Toggle the camera animation on and off or, alternatively, control the camera’s motion with the keyboard.
The camera can be controlled using the WASD keys to move side-to-side and the E/Q keys for up-down movement.

## Additional Instructions / Notes:

This viewer is meant to be used in tandem with the 2D to 3D API made by Nathaniel to interact with the Meta SAM and SAM 3D libraries. However, running this
API and model generation requires a heavy GPU, and the API is currently used through a cloud GPU with a docker image for testing. So, test models have been provided
so that the tester/grader does not need access to this API to use the viewer and test how it works. Use with the API can be seen in the Demo video, otherwise use the
/testModels directory to implement pre-existing models (the sonic is a really good generation, we recommend using that one).

A refresher of controls:
* WASD - Side to Side Camera Movement
* E/Q - Up-Down Camera Movement
* Arrow Keys - Model translation
* Mouse Drag and Click - Model X-Y Rotation
* Shift Mouse Drag and Click - Locked Z-Axis Rotation
* L - Toggle light
* K - Toggle Shadows
* G - Toggle Mesh glass mode
* 1 - Toggle Diffuse Lighting
* 2 - Toggle Specular Highlights

## For Loading: 
If you get an error in the console saying something like :
Uncaught (in promise) TypeError: NetworkError when attempting to fetch resource
This is likely because of CORS policies which may block the fetch command to get the hat object or something else in the directory. Try opening up the 
file in WebStorm of another IDE first and clicking on the "Chrome" option for opening the project in the browser. This has fixed it on our end usually, but if not you may need to 
setup a local web server using localhost to host the file. 

## Challenges faced during this project:

There were MANY challenges faced for this project, namely the rendering of a splat file. Firstly, there are not many existing loaders for rendering splats, and the ones
that do exist are somewhat heavy to load in for just te purpose of parsing. So to find a method that accurately parsed the splat file was challenging. Additionally, the relighting environment
and splats required the use of WebGL 2.0, which is slightly different than WebGL 1.0, and presented a learning curve and a lot of google searching when things threw errors. However, this allowed for cleaner matrix
handling and built-in functions which were useful notably for the glass reflections for inversion. The splat file re-lighting was hard to figure out until we found Andrew Chan's article which allowed us to
know the techniques to look for during further research, while also being able to reference his equations directly. Implementing the actual geometry for the splat, without relighting, was actually easier than we thought, since it was
just a bunch of primitive quad objects. Furthermore, the frame buffer for the re-lighting was somewhat confusing until we had went over pre/post processing textures in class for blurring.

Also, having both the mesh AND splat models in the same scene was hard to navigate, and required a lot of conditionals all around our javascript and HTML files. Loading the GLB files for the mesh
was much easier since there were existing loaders to use, which we implemented here. There is probably a better way to navigate these conflicting frameworks than making extra shader scripts in the html file, but that was the easiest way
we had found to get around the conflicting environments needed for meshes/splats.

Due to the amount of time it took to navigate some of these issues, some of the features were more rushed than others to meet the rubric accordingly, and if we had more time
we would've liked to implement the actual 2D-to-3D API itself within the HTML so objects could be generated in real time without a separate application.

## Work Delegation:

Between the two of us, the work was split up at the beginning regarding the splat models and the mesh model implementations. Clive focused more on the mesh viewer in the beginning to setup the lighting, geometry, and texture bindings, while Nathaniel
focused on the splat viewer and tackling the re-lighting and filtering. Eventually, we had to merge these two concepts a bit to align the transformations for both objects and some of the smaller features like
model movement and hierarchical modeling was done together during meeting times. By the end, both of us had even ownership of the project for its completion.